<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h1>XIII</h1>
			<p>The door of the house stood wide. The afternoon radiance gilded the emerald veil of willows, shot back in fire from the unshuttered windows, rifled the last syringas of their inmost fragrance. Vance, even through his perturbation, felt again the spell of the old house. That door had first admitted him into the illimitable windings of the Past; and as he approached the magic threshold compunction and anger vanished.</p>
			<p>"Oh, Vance!" he heard Miss Spear exclaim. He caught in her rich voice a mingling of reproach and apology--yes, apology. She was atoning already--for what?--but she was also challenging. "I knew you'd come." She put her hand on his arm with her light coercive touch. "Our cousin Mr. Tom Lorburn is here--he arrived unexpectedly on Sunday to see the Willows. It's years and years since he's been here. . . ."</p>
			<p>"A surprise visit," came a voice, an old cracked fluty voice, querulous and distinguished, from the drawing room. "And I <i>was</i> surprised. . . . But perhaps you'll bring the young man in here, Halo. . . . Whatever you have to say to him may as well be said in my presence, since I am here . . ."</p>
			<p>The little tirade ended almost in a wail, as the speaker, drooping in the doorway, looked down on Vance from the vantage of his narrow shoulders and lean brown throat. Vance looked up, returning the gaze. He had hardly ever seen anyone as tall as Mr. Lorburn, and no one, ever, as plaintively and unhappily handsome. A chronic distress was written on the narrow beautiful face condescending to his, with its perfectly arched nose, and the sensitive lips under a carefully trimmed white moustache; and the distress was repeated in the droop of Mr. Lorburn's shoulders under their easily fitting homespun, in the hollowing of his chest, and the clutch of his long expressive brown hand (so like Mrs. Spear's) on the bamboo stick which supported him.</p>
			<p>"Since unhappily I <i>am</i> here," Mr. Lorburn repeated.</p>
			<p>Miss Spear met this with a little laugh. "Oh, Cousin Tom--why unhappily? After all, since you've come, it was just as well you should arrive when we were all napping."</p>
			<p>Mr. Lorburn bent his grieved eyes upon her. "Just as well?"</p>
			<p>"That you should know the worst."</p>
			<p>"Ah, <i>that</i> we never know, my child; there's always something worse behind the worst. . . ." Mr. Lorburn, shaking his head, turned back slowly through the drawing room. "There's my health, to begin with, which no one but myself ever appears to think of. A shock of this kind, in this heat . . ."</p>
			<p>"Well, here's Vance Weston, who has come, as I knew he would, to clear things up."</p>
			<p>Mr. Lorburn considered Vance again in the light of this fresh introduction. "I should be glad if he could do that," he said.</p>
			<p>"Then," said Miss Spear briskly, "let's begin by transporting ourselves to the scene of the crime, as they say in the French law reports."</p>
			<p>She slipped her arm in Mr. Lorburn's, and led him through the two drawing rooms, his long wavering stride steadied by her firm tread. Vance followed, wondering.</p>
			<p>In the library the shutters were open, and the western sun streamed in on the scene of disorder which Vance had left so lightheartedly three days before. He wondered at his own callousness. In the glare of the summer light the room looked devastated, dishonoured; and the long grave face of Miss Elinor Lorburn, with its chalky highlights on brow and lappets, seemed to appeal to her cousin and heir for redress. "See how they have profaned my solitude--that, at least, my family always respected!"</p>
			<p>Mr. Lorburn let himself down by cautious degrees into the Gothic armchair. "At least," he echoed, as if answering the look, "if I never came here, I gave strict orders that nothing should be touched . . . that everything should remain absolutely as she left it."</p>
			<p>The words were dreadful to Vance. His eyes followed Mr. Lorburn's about the room, resting on the books pitched down on chairs and tables, on the gaping spaces of the shelves, and the lines of volumes which had collapsed for lack of support. Then he looked at the cigarette ashes which Lorry Spear had scattered irreverently on the velvet table cover, and his gaze turned back to Mr. Lorburn's scandalized countenance. He felt too crushed to speak. But Miss Spear spoke for him:</p>
			<p>"Now, Cousin Tom, that all sounds very pretty; but just consider what would have happened if we'd obeyed you literally. The place would have been a foot deep in dust. Everything in it would have been ruined; and if the house hadn't been regularly aired your precious books would have been covered with green mould. So what's the use--"</p>
			<p>Vance lifted his head eagerly, reassured by her voice. "The books did need cleaning," he said. "But I was wrong not to put them back after I'd wiped them, the way you told me to. Fact is, I'd never had a chance at real books before, and I got reading, and forgot everything. . . ." He looked at Miss Spear. "I'm sorry," he said.</p>
			<p>Mr. Lorburn, leaning on his stick, emitted a faint groan. "The young man, as he says himself, appears to have forgotten everything--even to return the books he has taken from here."</p>
			<p>Again Mrs. Tracy's accusation! Vance turned his eyes on Miss Spear; but to his bewilderment her eloquence seemed to fail her. She met his glance, but only for a moment; then hers was averted. At last she said in a low voice: "I'm sure he'll tell you the books are at Mrs. Tracy's . . . that he took them away to finish reading something that interested him . . . without realising their value. . . ."</p>
			<p>"I'm waiting to hear what he has to tell me," Mr. Lorburn rejoined. "But I must remind you, Halo, that, according to your own statement, Mrs. Tracy has looked everywhere for the books, and been forced to the conclusion--as you were--that when the young man disappeared from her house he took them with him. Perhaps he will now say if he has been obliging enough to bring them back."</p>
			<p>Mr. Lorburn revolved his small head on his long thin neck and fixed his eyes on Vance.</p>
			<p>Vance felt the muscles of his face contracting. His lips were so stiff that he could hardly move them. These people were suggesting that he had taken away books from the Willows--valuable books! This Mr. Lorburn, apparently, was almost accusing him of having stolen them! What else could he mean by the phrase "When he disappeared from Mrs. Tracy's he took them with him"? Vance felt as defenceless as a little boy against whom a schoolmate had trumped up a lying charge; in his first bewilderment he did not know what to say, or what tone to take. Then his anger rushed to his lips.</p>
			<p>"What's this about taking books away and disappearing? I never disappeared. I went with Upton to a ball game." He felt himself redden at the memory. "I never took a single book away from here, not one."</p>
			<p>Miss Spear interrupted eagerly: "I told you so, Cousin Tom . . . I was sure. . . ."</p>
			<p>Mr. Lorburn leaned more heavily on his stick. "Where are they then?" Her head drooped, and she turned from him with an appealing gesture. "Vance?--"</p>
			<p>"What books?" Vance asked again.</p>
			<p>Mr. Lorburn drew himself to his feet and began to move across the room with shaking sideway steps, his stick pointed first at one shelf, then at another. As he did so he reeled off a succession of long titles, all too unfamiliar to Vance for his ear to hold them. He heard "rare Americana," and did not know if it were the name of a book or a reference to some literary category he had never met with. At last he said: "I never even heard of the names of any of those books. Why on earth should I have taken them?"</p>
			<p>"Never heard of them?" Mr. Lorburn spluttered. "Then some accomplished bibliophile must have given you a list." He looked pale and gasping, like a fish agonizing for water. "Oh, my heart--I should never have let myself to be drawn into this." Sitting down again, he closed his lids and leaned his head against the knobby carving of the armchair.</p>
			<p>Vance was alarmed by his appearance; but he noticed that it did not affect Miss Spear. She continued to fix her anxious gaze upon himself. "Just try to remember exactly what happened." She spoke as if reassuring a child. Her voice was too kind, too compassionate; his own caught in his throat, and he felt the tears swelling.</p>
			<p>"Of course I didn't take any books," he repeated. "And I didn't disappear--I went with Upton. . . ."</p>
			<p>"Of course," she said. "But the books are gone. There's the point. Very valuable ones, unluckily."</p>
			<p>("The most valuable," Mr. Lorburn interjected, his eyes still closed.)</p>
			<p>"Think, Vance; when you left last Saturday night, didn't you forget to shut this window?" She pointed to the window near which she stood.</p>
			<p>The definiteness of the question cleared Vance's mind.</p>
			<p>"No, I didn't. I fastened all the shutters and windows before I left."</p>
			<p>She paused, and he saw a look of uncertainty in her face. "Think again, please. On Sunday morning this one was found open, and the shutter had been unhooked from the inside. Someone must have got in after you left, and taken the books, for they're really gone. We've hunted everywhere."</p>
			<p>Vance repeated: "I fastened all the shutters; I'm sure I did. And I locked the front door." He stopped, and then remembered that when he left the house Lorburn Spear had been with him. "Ask your brother; I guess he'll remember."</p>
			<p>As he spoke, there came back to him the sensation he had experienced as he waited in the dusk of the hall for Lorry Spear, who had gone back to the library to find his cigarette case. He had been a long time finding it, and while Vance waited he had heard that mysterious sound somewhere in the distance: a sound like a window opening or a shutter swinging loose. He had thought of Laura Lou's childish fears, smiled them away, and nevertheless turned back to see. . . .</p>
			<p>"My brother? Yes, I know he was with you," Miss Spear said, almost irritably. Her face looked expressionless, cold. "He says it was you who attended to closing the house."</p>
			<p>"Well, doesn't he say I closed everything?"</p>
			<p>"He says he doesn't remember." She paused, and then began, in a hasty authoritative tone: "Someone must have broken in. Someone has taken the books. Try to remember what happened when you were leaving--try again, Vance," she urged, more gently.</p>
			<p>Mr. Lorburn still sat with closed eyes, and the gasping fishlike expression. He murmured again: "I ought not to have let myself be drawn into this--" and then was silent.</p>
			<p>Vance looked resolutely at Miss Spear. Her eyes wavered, as if trying to escape from him; then they bathed him in a fluid caress. The caress poured over him, enveloping, persuading. The words were on his lips: "But after we left the library your brother went back to it alone--while he was there I heard a window opened . . . or thought I did. . . ." <i>Thought you did?</i> But only <i>thought,</i> her smile whispered back, silencing him. How can you suggest (it said) . . . and anyhow, what use would it be? Don't you see that I can't let you touch my brother? Vance felt himself subdued and mastered. . . . He couldn't hurt her . . . he couldn't. He had the sense of being shut in with her in a hidden circle of understanding and connivance.</p>
			<p>"Of course a burglar broke in somehow and stole the books," he heard her begin again with renewed energy. "Come, Cousin Tom; why should we stay any longer? It's just upsetting you. . . . This is a job for the police."</p>
			<p>She held out her hand to Vance. "I'm sorry--but I had to ask you to come."</p>
			<p>He said of course she had to . . . he understood; but the only thing he really understood was that she had bound him fast in a net of unspoken pledges. As they reached the door she turned back. "We'll see you again soon--at Eaglewood? Promise. . . ."</p>
			<p>But he had given her his last promise. "I don't know. I'm going to New York. . . . Maybe I'll have to go back home. . . ."</p>
			<p>Mr. Lorburn had descended the steps and was walking unsteadily along the drive. Miss Spear looked at Vance. "Yes, go," she said quickly, "but come back someday." Her face was sunned over with relief; for a moment she reminded him of the girl of the mountaintop. "Don't forget me," she said, and pressed his hand. She unlocked the gate and sprang into the car after Mr. Lorburn. Vance watched them drive away. Then he walked slowly down the lane without once looking back at the old house. He felt sick at heart, diminished and ashamed, as he had at Crampton the day he had seen his grandfather prowling by the river.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
