<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<h1>XXVI</h1>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tracy was not expected back till the following evening, and for twenty-four hours Vance struggled alone against the dark mystery of illness. As he watched through the night beside Laura Lou, watched her burning face and hollow eyes, and sought to quiet her tossings and soothe her incessant cough, he tried to recall what had been done for him during his own illness. He too had been consumed with fever day and night, week after week; and his mother and sisters had been always there, with cooling drinks, soft touches, ingenious ways of easing his misery⁠—and here he sat by his wife, his hands all thumbs, his shoes creaking, his brain in a fog, unable to imagine what he ought to do for her.</p>
			<p>At one moment her eyes, which had clung to his so anxiously, always asking for something he could not guess, suddenly became the eyes of a stranger. She looked at him in terror, and sitting up thrust him back. “Oh, go away⁠—go away! You shan’t take Vanny from me⁠ ⁠… I say you shan’t!” For a while she rambled on, battling against the obduracy of some invisible presence; then she sank back, and tears of weakness forced their way through the lids she had shut against her husband⁠ ⁠… Vance threw himself down by her and held her in beseeching arms. “Laura Lou⁠ ⁠… Laura Lou⁠ ⁠… Vanny’s here; love, it’s Vanny holding you.⁠ ⁠…” With passionate murmurs he smoothed the hair from her forehead, and gradually her contracted face relaxed, and she opened her lids, and tried to smile. “Is it you, Vanny? Don’t go⁠ ⁠… you’ll never leave me any more, will you?”⁠ ⁠… She dozed off on his shoulder for a few minutes before the cough woke her again.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>When morning came she refused to touch the milk he had warmed, and lay tossing and coughing in parched misery. What was it? Bronchitis? His heart sank: what was it people did for bronchitis? There was no telephone, and no nearby neighbour except an old deaf woman who would probably not be of much use⁠—even if Vance could absent himself long enough to summon her. He decided to run across to the deaf woman’s house, and bribe her grandson, a lazy fellow who was not on good terms with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tracy, to bicycle to Paul’s Landing for a doctor; but whenever he tried to creep out of the room his shoes creaked or a board cried, and Laura Lou started up. “Don’t leave me, Vanny⁠—you mustn’t leave me⁠ ⁠…” and the heavy hours dragged on⁠ ⁠… Vance rummaged out an old bottle of cough mixture, and gave her some; but it did not relieve her, and the hands she wound about his neck grew drier and more burning. It was as if the fever were visibly consuming her, so small and shrunken had her restless body become. As he sat there and watched it was her turn to become a stranger: this haggard changeling was not the tender creature whom he loved. This discovery of the frail limits of personality, of the transformation of what seemed closest and most fixed in the flux of life, dragged his brain down into a labyrinth of conjecture. What was she, this being so beloved and so unknown? Something in her craved for him and clung to him, yet when he tried to reach that something it was not there. Unknown forces possessed her, she was wandering in ways he could not follow.⁠ ⁠… Now and then he got up and replenished the stove; now and then he wet a handkerchief with cologne water and put it on her forehead, or clumsily shook up her pillows.⁠ ⁠… But he did it all automatically, as if he too were elsewhere, in ways as lonely as those she walked.⁠ ⁠… Was this why we were all so fundamentally alone? Because, as each might blend with another in blissful fusion, so, at any moment, the empty eyes of a stranger might meet us under familiar brows? But then, where was the real primordial personality, each man’s indestructible inmost self? Where did it hide, what was it made of, what laws controlled it? What <i>was</i> the Vance Weston who must remain himself though sickness and sorrow and ruin destroyed the familiar surface of his being? Or was there no such unchangeable nucleus? Would he and Laura Lou and all their kind flow back finally into that vast impersonal Divinity which had loomed in his boyish dreams?⁠ ⁠… But, oh, those little hands with twining fingers, the deep-lashed eyes, the hollows under the cheekbones⁠—those were Laura Lou’s and no other’s, they belonged to the body he worshipped, whose lovely secrets were his.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>He started up with blinking eyes. The room was dark⁠—the fire out. Had he fallen asleep in trying to soothe his wife to rest? He became dimly conscious of someone’s having come in; someone who groped about, struck a match, and held a candle in his face. “For God’s sake, Vance! Why are you here in the dark? What’s happened to my child?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tracy cried; and Vance, stumbling to his feet, brushed back his hair and stared at her.</p>
			<p>But she had no time to deal with him. In a trice she had lit the lamp, revived the fire, thrust a thermometer between Laura Lou’s lips, and piled more blankets on her. “What is she taking? What does the doctor say?” she whispered over her shoulder.</p>
			<p>“She hasn’t seen the doctor.”</p>
			<p>“Not seen him? You mean he hasn’t been?”</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>“How long’s she been like this?”</p>
			<p>“Since last night.”</p>
			<p>“Last night? And she’s seen no doctor? When did you go for him?” She drew closer, deserting her daughter to approach her fierce whisper to his ear.</p>
			<p>“I didn’t go. She wouldn’t let me leave her.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>The withering twitch of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tracy’s lips simulated a laugh. “I guess it’d be luckier for her if you’d leave her and never come back. And now,” she added scornfully, “go and get the doctor as quick as you can; and don’t show yourself here without him. It’s pneumonia.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Five anxious days passed before Vance could think of his writing or of the office. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tracy had given him to understand that he’d better go back to work, for all the use he was to her or Laura Lou: cluttering up the house, and no more help to anybody than a wooden Indian.⁠ ⁠… But it seemed part of his expiation to sit there and let her say such things. He suspected that, though she railed at him for being in the way, it was a relief to have him there, to be scolded and found fault with; besides, now and then there was something for him to do: coals to carry up, provisions or medicines to fetch, tasks not requiring much quickness of wit or hand.⁠ ⁠… He knew that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tracy was justified in blaming him for Laura Lou’s illness. The doctor said he had been crazy to drag her up the mountain through the snow, and expose her to the night air when her strength was lowered by fatigue. She hadn’t much stamina anyway; and the long climb had affected her heart. The doctor took Vance aside to tell him that this sort of thing mustn’t happen again; and Vance saw <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tracy gloating over the admonishment. Well, let her⁠ ⁠… he deserved it.</p>
			<p>During those days it seemed to him that he had at last grown from a boy into a man. He was not quick in practical matters; such lessons came to him slowly; but this one sank deep. He was frightened to think how completely, when Beauty called, that celestial Beauty which haunted earth and sky, and the deeps of his soul, he forgot everything else, and rushed after the voice unheeding. When that happened, his two worlds were merged in one, or rather the world of daily duties vanished under a more overwhelming reality. But this would no longer be so. He would school himself to keep the two apart.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>At length, when Laura Lou, propped against her pillows, first looked at him with reassured eyes, he decided to go to New York. He arrived empty-handed at the office, for he had not been able to write a line in the interval. He hoped to see Eric Rauch first and explain to him; but Rauch was out, and Vance was told that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tarrant was expecting him. Rauch was pliant and understanding; but his chief, to Vance, was a riddle. You could never tell if he was going to turn his nervous brilliant smile on you or meet you with a face of stone. He greeted Vance with a surprise in which the latter scented irony, and when told of Laura Lou’s illness uttered the proper sentiments and at once jerked back to business. “Too bad⁠ ⁠… too bad⁠ ⁠… yes, of course.⁠ ⁠… My wife would have been glad to do anything⁠ ⁠… Well, now the anxiety’s over I hope you’ll take hold again. So much time’s been lost that you really owe it to us⁠ ⁠…” and so on. Vance listened in silence. What could he say? At length he began: “You wouldn’t care to have me change ’round and write some poetry for you?” Tarrant’s face expressed a mixture of dismay and resentment. Poetry? Good God, everybody wanted to write poetry for them: magazine poetry was the easiest thing on earth to turn out. And here was a fellow who could do something else; who had a real gift as a short-story writer; as a novelist, perhaps⁠—and wanting to throw away a chance like that to join the anonymous crowd in the Poets’ Corner! Really, now, didn’t Weston understand? He was bound to them; bound to do a certain thing; had signed a contract to that effect. Contracts weren’t one-sided affairs, after all.⁠ ⁠… Tarrant’s frown relaxed, and he laid his hand on his contributor’s shoulder. “See here; you’ve had a bad shake-up. It’s liable to happen to any of us. Only, once a fellow’s formed the habit of work he keeps straight at it⁠ ⁠… through everything.⁠ ⁠…” Tarrant straightened his shoulders, as though discreetly offering himself as an object lesson. “Now then, Weston, better get back home as quick as you can, and tie up to your next short story. If ‘Unclaimed’ doesn’t pull off the Pulsifer Prize, who knows but you’ve got something up your sleeve that will? I understand that Fynes asked you for an article on <i>The Corner Grocery.</i> The sale of his book has fallen off lately, and he counts on us to buck it up. If you’d made a hit with the article it would have given you a big boost for the prize. But I’ve had to turn Rauch onto it because there was no time to wait. So you can put that out of your mind anyhow, and just tackle your story,” Tarrant ended on a note of affability.</p>
			<p>“All right,” Vance mumbled, glad to be gone.</p>
			<p>He had a couple of hours to spare before his train, and began to wander through the streets, as he had during his first dark days in New York. Then he had been unknown and starving; now he had a name, had friends, a roof over his head, and a wife who adored him; yet his inner solitude was deeper than ever. Was the fault his, or was it latent in this dreadful system of forcing talent, trying to squeeze every drop out of it before it was ripe; the principle of the quick turnover applied to brains as it was to real estate? As he walked, the old dream of the New York novel recurred to him: the jostling crowds, the swarm of motors, the huge arrogant masses of masonry, roused his imagination, and he thought to himself: “Tarrant’s right; what a fool I was to talk poetry to him!” He stood on a corner of Fifth Avenue while the motors crawled up and down in endless procession, and looking into one slowly moving carriage after another he wondered what sort of a life each of these women (they were almost all women) led, where they were going, what they were thinking of, what other lives were interwoven with theirs. Oh, to have a year to dream of it all, without putting pen to paper! But even a year would not be enough; what he needed was to immerse himself in life without so much as remembering that it must some day bring him in a return, to live as carelessly as all these women rolling past him in their motors.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pulsifer⁠—she was that kind, he supposed. The thought reminded him of her telegram. He hadn’t answered it because he hadn’t known what to say. But now that he was in town, why not try to see her? Funny woman⁠—she’d signed the wire “Jet,” as if he and she were old friends! Lucky she had such a queer name; if she’d been called Mabel, or any real woman’s name, he’d never have heard the end of it from Laura Lou.⁠ ⁠… He remembered her address: she lived only a few streets off, he had plenty of time to call before catching his train. She’d be out, probably; but then he could write and say he’d been.⁠ ⁠… He reached the street and identified the number as that of an impressive wide-fronted house, the kind he had often curiously gazed at in wandering about the city, but never imagined himself entering. He rang the bell, and instantly, as if he had been expected, the heavy double door of glass and wrought iron flew open, and a tall young man in a dark coat with silver buttons barred the threshold.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pulsifer? No⁠—she wasn’t in, the young man said in surprise, as if Vance had asked something almost too ridiculous to be worth answering. But as he spoke, at the far end of a perspective of marble and dusky rugs and majestic stairway Vance saw a figure flit forward and hesitate. “Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weston⁠—it <i>is</i> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Weston? Why, I <i>am</i> out, really⁠ ⁠… I’m due at the other end of nowhere at this very instant.⁠ ⁠…” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pulsifer stood before him, wrapped in furs, her long jade earrings making her face narrower and more anxious than ever under the swathings of her close little hat. “But do come in all the same⁠—just for a minute, won’t you?” Her tone was half aggrieved, half entreating, she seemed to want him to say yes, yet not to forget that she had just cause for resentment.</p>
			<p>Vance was looking curiously about him; at that moment the house interested him more than its owner. “Well go upstairs⁠—you really don’t mind walking?” she queried, implying that of course there was a lift if he did; and he followed her across the many-coloured paving of the hall, up the wide staircase with its ornate rail of steel and gilding, across another hall and through a great room with shadowy hangings full of figures and trees and colonnaded architecture. Vance had never been in a house so big and splendid, never even imagined one. From the room of the tapestries they passed to another, all in dark wood, with pictures on the panels, and great gilt standards bearing lights; and finally came to a small circular apartment where there were forced flowers in porcelain bowls, more pictures, books, and low wide armchairs covered with dove-coloured silk. Vance gazed at it all, enchanted. “Do you live here all alone?” he asked.</p>
			<p>She looked at him in surprise. “Do I⁠—? Why, of course, yes. How funny of you! What did you think⁠—?”</p>
			<p>“I thought maybe the house was divided up into apartments, it’s so big.”</p>
			<p>“Well, it might be,” she admitted, sighing. “Sometimes I wish it were. It’s horribly lonely, having it all to myself.” She sighed again. “I <i>hate</i> big houses, don’t you?”</p>
			<p>His captivated eyes were still scanning the long vista of rooms. “No; I think they’re great⁠—when they’re like this⁠ ⁠… all the space and the height and the quietness.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>She gave a little conscious laugh and instantly adopted his view. “Oh, you like it? I’m so glad; because, you see, these big rooms were really rather my doing. I insisted on the architect’s carrying out my own ideas⁠—giving me all the elbowroom I wanted. They have so little imagination.” The tall young man with the silver buttons presented himself, as if noiselessly summoned, and she dropped her furs on his arm, said: “Yes⁠—tea, I think; and I’m at home to no one,” tossed off her hat, and sank into one of the dove-coloured chairs. The tall young man closed the door behind him, and shut Vance and his hostess into flower-scented privacy. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pulsifer turned her anxious eyes on her visitor. “I suppose you were horrified at my telegraphing?”</p>
			<p>“Horrified; no, why?”</p>
			<p>“I was afraid you thought I oughtn’t to ask you to come here at all, because of that wretched prize; that you were afraid of what people might think.⁠ ⁠… But I really wanted most desperately to see you about Fynes. You see, practically he has the casting vote; the others just cringe to him. And I knew he’d told you to come and see him about an article or something, and was very huffy because you didn’t; and I wanted to warn you, and to beg you to do whatever he asks. And when you didn’t answer and didn’t come I was perfectly miserable.⁠ ⁠… I know I’m a goose, I know what you’ll think.⁠ ⁠… But I can’t help it; I do so want you to get the prize,” she said, suddenly leaning forward and laying her hand on his.</p>
			<p>Her touch startled him, for he was still absorbed in contemplation of the room. “Oh, that’s ever so kind of you,” he stammered, feeling he ought to take her hand; but it had already slipped from him, and she had drawn back with one of her uncertain movements. “It’s all wrong, I know,” she insisted. “I oughtn’t to care about it, I oughtn’t to have any opinion; you’d think ever so much better of me if I stood aloof and let the committee decide.” For a moment a wistful smile gave her thin face the contour of youth. “But the first moment I saw you I felt⁠ ⁠…” She stood up, moving away with her long step. “Should you like to see the rooms? Do you care for pictures?”</p>
			<p>Yes, Vance said, he’d like first-rate to look round. He explained eagerly that he’d seen hardly any pictures, and wanted to get hold of some good books on the history of painting⁠ ⁠… maybe she could lend him some? But he was checked by the perception that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pulsifer was no longer listening, and that this was not the sort of thing she wanted to hear. He was dimly aware that he had missed his chance, that had he imprisoned her hand the prize would have been his. “Rauch would never have let her go,” he thought, half amused. But she was too unlike the other women with whom he had exchanged easy caresses. She seemed bloodless, immaterial, as if she were a part of her splendid and unfamiliar setting, and might at any moment recede into one of the great gilt frames at which he stood gazing. She poured out a glib patter about the pictures, <i>her</i> pictures; her Constable, <i>her</i> Rembrandt, <i>her</i> Ver Meer, other names he didn’t catch in his excitement; and then led him to another room to show him her “moderns,” bewildering things with unknown names, but all alluded to in the same proprietary tone, as if the artists, whoever they were, had worked, like her architect, only for her and under her direction. Some painters, not represented on her walls, she spoke of with contempt, said she wouldn’t have them at any price though other people fought for them⁠—she was determined to be herself, to be independent, no matter how hard people tried to influence her. Didn’t he think she was right, she challenged him? Her nervous chatter disturbed his enjoyment of the pictures, and prevented the isolation of soul in which great impressions reached him. What a pity, he thought! His heart was beating and murmuring with new harmonies; but perhaps another day, when he got to know her better, and they felt more at ease with each other, he could ask her to let him come back. And he thought how different it would have been if the woman at his side had been Halo Tarrant, who always made him see beautiful things more clearly instead of blurring them.</p>
			<p>“Ah⁠—here’s tea. But you’d rather have a cocktail?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pulsifer said. They had returned to the circular room; by the fire stood a table with cups of thin porcelain around a shining urn. Vance said he’d rather have tea. No one had ever offered it to him at that hour, and it amused him to watch her slim hands moving over the tray, shaking the tea into the teapot, regulating the flame of the urn. It reminded him of a scene in an English novel he had read at the Willows. He began to think of his own novel again, and had to rouse himself to hear what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pulsifer was saying⁠—something hurried and confused about being lonely, and hating her riches because they shut her off from the only people she cared to see⁠ ⁠… and worshipping genius, and wondering if he wouldn’t promise to be her great great friend, and come often to see her, and tell her all her faults, and let her talk to him about herself⁠—which, it seemed to Vance, was just what she had been doing for the last hour.⁠ ⁠… He mumbled that he was ever so grateful, and would be glad if she’d let him come back for another look at the pictures; but she said if it was only to see the pictures that he wanted to come he was like everybody else, and didn’t care for her but for her house, and what she wanted was a friend who would feel the same about her if she lived in a hovel; but she supposed she wasn’t clever enough to interest the only kind of people who interested her, and must just make the best of this dreadful loneliness that her money seemed to condemn her to.⁠ ⁠… Her eyes filled, and for a moment she seemed to break her unreality and become human. “Oh, don’t say that⁠—you mustn’t, you know⁠—” he began, putting down his cup and moving nearer; but as he did so he caught sight of a clock over her shoulder, and exclaimed: “God, I’ve only just got time to catch my train⁠—Sorry⁠ ⁠… I’ve got to run for it.⁠ ⁠…” Her face changed again, narrowing into distrust and resentment. Why did he have to catch that particular train? Weren’t there plenty of others? She forced a smile to add that people always made excuses like that when they were bored with you, and she supposed she’d bored him⁠ ⁠… or else why wouldn’t he stay? But Vance remembered a promise to get back with a new tonic for Laura Lou. No, he couldn’t, he said; there was no train till much later, and he had his work.⁠ ⁠… “Ah, your work; how I envy people with work, work like yours, I mean.⁠ ⁠…” Her face softened, she left her hand in his. “You’ll really come again soon, won’t you? You’ll come next week? You shall have the pictures all to yourself; I’ll hide away, and you won’t even see me,” she assured him laughingly; and he thanked her and fled.</p>
			<p>By the time he reached Paul’s Landing the whole episode had faded into unreality. Were there houses like that, women like that, pictures like that? The chief impression that remained was that she had said he could come back and see the pictures.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tracy was waiting on the threshold, and he handed her the tonic with the satisfaction he felt when he had managed not to forget an errand. How was Laura Lou? Had the day been good? Pretty good⁠—yes; but she was a little tired. He’d better not go up: she was sleeping. He turned in to the dining room and went over to his desk, his mind full of things he wanted to put down while they were hot. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tracy followed, and after straightening the plates on the dinner table came and stood by the desk. “There was someone called to see you,” she said.</p>
			<p>“Someone⁠—who?”</p>
			<p>“Bunty Hayes.”</p>
			<p>The blood rushed to Vance’s forehead. Hayes⁠—the cheek of the fellow’s having followed him here! “I’ll have to fight it out with him after all,” he thought.</p>
			<p>“He’s been after me already, at the office. He says he wants to fight me.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tracy smiled coldly. “He didn’t want to fight you today. What he wanted was his money.”</p>
			<p>Vance’s anger exploded. “His money? I’m doing all I can to earn it for him. If I could do it quicker I would.”</p>
			<p>“That’s what I told him,” she agreed, still coldly.</p>
			<p>“Well, did he go away after that?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Tracy hesitated, and wiped her wasted hands on her apron. “Not right off.”</p>
			<p>“Why⁠—what else did he want?”</p>
			<p>“To see Laura Lou.”</p>
			<p>“Laura Lou? The fellow’s impudence!” Vance laughed indignantly.</p>
			<p>“He wasn’t impudent. He was sorry she was so sick. I could see how bad he felt.”</p>
			<p>Vance found nothing to say. The remembrance of the crumpled letter on the floor of his wife’s room shot through him with the same pang as before.</p>
			<p>“Well, I’ve got to get to work,” he said.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
