<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h1>XXVIII</h1>
			<p>Vance stopped short. It was three years since he had seen the Willows.</p>
			<p>June sunlight lay on the weed-grown lawn. Turrets and balconies showed in uncertain glimpses through layer on layer of overlapping lilac fringes. A breath of sweetness, which would have been imperceptible but for the million of calyxes exhaling it, enveloped the old house as faintly but pervasively as the colour of the wistaria flowers. As he stood there other perfumes stole to him: the purple burden of lilacs, the warm drip of white laburnums, and that haunting syringa smell which was like the noise of bees on a thundery day. On the fluctuations of the breeze they came now from one corner, now another, of the deserted shrubberies, waylaying Vance with their loveliness. But inside the house was that magical room, and all the shadowy power of the past.</p>
			<p>He had not been near the Willows since the day when the late Mr. Lorburn had accused him of stealing the books. The place lay on the farther side of Paul's Landing, and his daily tramp to and from Mrs. Tracy's took him nowhere near it. He had been forbidden to return there, and if he disobeyed it might cost his mother-in-law her job. Yet there were days when he could hardly trust himself not to scramble over the gate and try for a loose shutter or a broken latch. Those unused books, row on row in the darkness, drew him unbearably; so he walked in other directions.</p>
			<p>Mrs. Tracy, some days earlier, had been seized with inflammatory rheumatism. Laura Lou had to wait on her and do the cooking and washing; besides, she had never got back her strength since her illness, and it would have been imprudent to expose her to the cold of an uninhabited house. For two weeks the Willows remained unvisited; and the thought was misery to Mrs. Tracy, who was sure another caretaker would supersede her. Laura Lou said: "Mother, it's too silly not to send Vanny," and Vance added jocosely: "Even if I <i>had</i> stolen those books, it would be too risky trying it on again." Mrs. Tracy, turning her face from him, said: "The keys are under the pincushion in the upper right-hand drawer. . . ." And there he stood.</p>
			<p>Laura Lou had charged him not to forget what he was there for. He was to open windows and shutters, air the rooms thoroughly, and make sure that no harm had come to the house since Mrs. Tracy's last visit. The two women prudently refrained from laying other duties on him: for the present the house must go undusted. "Just you tell him to take a good look round, so't that hired man'll see somebody's got his eye on him, and then come straight back here," was Mrs. Tracy's injunction to her daughter; who interpreted it: "Darling, all you got to do is to walk round, and tell her everything's all right."</p>
			<p>Vance decided to begin by a general inspection. He passed from room to room, letting light and warmth into one melancholy penumbra after another, wakening the ghosts in old mirrors, watching the live gold of the sun reanimate the dead gold of picture frames and candelabra. Under the high ceilings of the bedrooms, with their carved bedsteads and beruffled dressing tables, he had now and then an elusive sense of life, of someone slipping through doors just ahead, of a whisper of sandals across flowered carpets, as if his approach had dispersed a lingering congress of memories. In Miss Lorburn's dressing room he paused before the ornate toilet set with the porcelain swan in a nest of rushes. "She dreamed of Lohengrin, and saw a baby in the bulrushes." Lorry Spear's comment came back to him. Funny--he'd never seen Lorry Spear since that day; the fellow owed him ten dollars, too. Vance wondered what had become of him. . . . In the circular boudoir, with the upholstered blue satin armchairs and those gay lithographs of peasants dancing and grape-gathering, he lingered again, trying to imagine the lady in her youth, when the rooms were bright and dustless, and she wore one of those ruffled dresses looped with camellias. . . . "And she ended reading Coleridge all alone. . . ."</p>
			<p>He sat down in a blue armchair and closed his eyes. If he should open them on the young Elinor--pale and eager, the dark braids looped along her cheeks! As he sat there, Halo Tarrant's face substituted itself for the other. Slim and dark-braided, with flowing draperies and sandalled feet, she leaned in the window, looking out through the wistaria fringes for something, for someone. . . . Vance stood up, brushing away the vision. Weren't we all like Elinor Lorburn, looking out, watching for what never came? Ah, but there were the books--the books that had sufficed her, after all! He moved away, as if with her hand in his--that shy compelling virgin hand--moved through the rooms, down passages and stairs, and across the patterned parquet of the drawing rooms to the library. He reached out to open the shutters, and as he did so Miss Lorburn's hand slipped from his, and he knew that when he turned she would no longer be beside him, young and wistful, but withdrawn into her frame above the mantelpiece, the mature resigned woman with the chalk lights on forehead and lappets. The woman who read Coleridge alone. . . .</p>
			<p>An orderly hand had effaced the traces of his former passage. The books he had taken down were back in their places, the furniture had been straightened. But on the fringed table cover of green velvet the Coleridge still lay open at "Kubla Khan," the gold-rimmed spectacles across the page. A touch of Halo's piety. . . .</p>
			<p>In the three-year interval much else had happened. Vance had read and studied, new avenues of knowledge had opened to him, linking together many unrelated facts, and Miss Lorburn's library was now less interesting in itself than because of the sad woman who had lived there. Sad, but not shrunken. He looked up at her, and she looked down with her large full-orbed eyes, the eyes of one who has renounced but not repined. . . . What a subject, if he could do it! He dropped again into the highbacked armchair where he had sat on that first day. "This is the Past--if only I could get back into it. . . ." She must have been lovely when she was young, with a sharp austere loveliness like Halo's; her long thin hands full of gifts for someone, or else stretched out empty to receive. No one, apparently, had wanted to give her anything, or to receive what she offered; yet instead of withering she had ripened. Her books, and some inner source of life, had kept her warm--he wondered how? And suddenly a queer idea came to him: the idea that Halo Tarrant knew. Was the fancy suggested by some resemblance in their features, or a likeness in expression, something about the eyes and hands? Halo had those same hands, long, like her face, and opening wide when she held them out to you, as if ready to receive or give, while her eyes questioned which it was to be. Yet Halo was married, had presumably fulfilled her destiny. . . . And so, perhaps, had the other woman in her different way. That was what explained the likeness--or else made it all the more obscure. . . . The afternoon shadows wheeled unnoticed across the lawn. Vance continued to sit motionless, letting the secret forces move within him. Whenever he could surrender to his creative fervour it always ended by carrying him to the mysterious point where effort ceased, and he seemed just to have to hold his breath and watch.</p>
			<p>He watched. . . .</p>
			<p>When he got home, Laura Lou said why'd he been gone so long, and her mother was fretting, and would he go upstairs right away and tell her everything was all right? He stared at her out of his dream, as if she had spoken an unknown language. "Oh, yes--all right . . . everything's all right. . . ." That night he sat up late, writing, writing. . . .</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Mrs. Tracy's recovery was slow, and she got into the habit of entrusting to Vance the weekly inspection of the Willows. The new owner, old Miss Louisa Lorburn, never came, never asked questions; and the Spear family, since Halo's marriage, were either in New York, or too busy with weekend parties at Eaglewood to think of policing the Willows. Sometimes Laura Lou went with Vance, accompanied by the woman who helped with the Tracys' washing: they left Vance in the library, and Laura Lou sang out to him to join her when the cleaning was over. On other days he went by himself; and before long the keys were in his pocket instead of being under Mrs. Tracy's pincushion. . . .</p>
			<p>During those long summer hours in the library he was conscious, for the first time, of a sort of equilibrium between the rush of his words and images and the subject they were to clothe. At first he did not write regularly; he was feeling his way. Much of his time was spent in a state of rich passivity; but the inner travail never ceased. . . . On the days when he had to report at the office he seemed to be walking in his sleep. New York had become a shadow, a mirage, the fermenting activities of his comrades of the Cocoanut Tree as meaningless as dancing to which one cannot hear the music. A subtle transposition had situated his only reality in that silent room among the books. He told Rauch he had started a novel, and on his next visit he was uncomfortably aware of editorial curiosity and impatience; but as yet he could show nothing to satisfy them. "I guess the book'll be called <i>Instead</i>," he merely stated; on which Rauch remarked: "Well, it don't sound exactly incandescent. . . ." Vance drew a breath of relief when, toward the end of the month, he learned that the Tarrants were starting for London and Paris to pick up new stuff for the review. . . .</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Rauch had said the title didn't sound incandescent. Well, the book, if it was ever written, wouldn't be incandescent either. Vance was more and more conscious of some deep-seated difference that cut him off from the circumambient literary "brightness," or rather left him unsatisfied by it. Perhaps he could have written like those other clever fellows whose novels and stories he devoured as they appeared. He was quick at picking up tricks of language and technique; and his reading had taught him what Frenside had meant by saying he was at the sedulous age. Ape these fellows--yes, he knew he could! He'd tried his hand at it, not always quite consciously; but though he was sometimes rather pleased with the result he always ended by feeling that it wasn't his natural way of representing things. These brilliant verbal gymnastics--or the staccato enumeration of a series of physical aspects and sensations--they all left him with the sense of an immense emptiness underneath, just where, in his own vision of the world, the deep forces stirred and wove men's fate. If he couldn't express that in his books he'd rather chuck it, and try real estate or reporting. . . . Some of the novels people talked about most excitedly--<i>Price of Meat,</i> say, already in its seventieth thousand, or <i>Egg Omelette,</i> which had owed its start to pulpit denunciations and the quarrel of a Prize Committee over its exact degree of indecency--well, he had begun both books with enthusiasm, as their authors appeared to have; and then, at a certain point, had felt the hollowness underfoot, and said to himself: "No, life's not like that, people are not like that. The real stuff is way down, not on the surface." When he got hold of <i>Faust</i> at the Willows, and came to the part about the mysterious Mothers, moving in subterranean depths among the primal forms of life, he shouted out: "That's it--the fellows that write those books are all Motherless!" And Laura Lou, hurrying down duster in hand, rushed in exclaiming: "Oh, Vanny, I thought there were burglars!"</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>He got into the way of going oftener and oftener to the Willows. He knew that he risked little in doing so. The Tarrants were in Europe, and nobody else was likely to bother him. If he could have carried off the books he wanted the temptation would have been less great; but even so he would have been drawn back by the contrast between the house at Paul's Landing, where there was neither beauty nor privacy nor peace and this tranquil solitude. On his second visit he brought with him a supply of paper and notebooks. They remained on Miss Lorburn's table, beside her Coleridge; and the temptation to return was doubled by the knowledge that he would always find them there, not tidied away or mixed up by interfering hands, but orderly and receptive, as he had left them. As soon as he was seated at the table his mind became clear and free, accidental preoccupations fell from it, and he was face to face with his vision.</p>
			<p>To explain his daily absences he told Laura Lou that he was needed at the office. Tarrant, he mentioned, had been called to Europe on business, and they were shorthanded. . . . A few months ago he would have been ashamed of deceiving her; now, since her illness, prevarication seemed wiser as well as safe. She mustn't be worried . . . she wouldn't understand. . . . He was beginning to see that there might be advantages in a wife who didn't understand. . . .</p>
			<p>Curiously enough, since he had settled down to this view his tenderness for her had increased. It was as though at first he had expected too much of her, and of himself in his relation to her. Since her illness he had learnt to know her better, had found her limitations easier to accept; and now that his intellectual hunger was appeased she satisfied the rest of his nature. The fact that he had so nearly lost her made her more precious, more vividly present to him; he felt in her a new quality which not only enchanted his senses but fed his imagination--if indeed there were any dividing line between the two. For Laura Lou seemed to belong equally to his body and soul--it was only his intelligence that she left unsatisfied. Into the world of his mind, with its consuming curiosities, its fervid joys, she would never enter--would never even discover that it existed. Sometimes, when a new idea grew in him like a passion, he ached to share it with her, but not for long. He had never known that kind of companionship, had just guessed at it through the groping wonder of his first talks with Halo Spear, when every word she spoke was a clue to new discoveries. He knew now that he and she might have walked those flaming ramparts together; but the path he had chosen was on a lower level. And he was happy there, after all; intellectual solitude was too old a habit to weigh on him. . . .</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the tale called <i>Instead</i> was taking shape. It began by a description of the Willows, and was to deal with the mysterious substitution of one value for another in a soul which had somehow found peace. The beginning went quickly; he had only to let the spirit of the place work in him, the picture shape itself under his attentive pen. And this justified his daily escape to the Willows--he had to do the novel as quickly as he could to pay off the interest on his loan. . . .</p>
			<p>One day he put his pen down, dismayed to find that--as so often before--he did not know his subject well enough to go on. His mind wandered back to his first sight of the Willows, when he had come there with Laura Lou and Upton. He had recalled, then, waking in the night years before at Euphoria, as a little boy, and hearing the bell of the Roman Catholic church toll the hour. That solemn reverberation, like the note of Joshua's trumpet, had made the walls of the present fall, and the little boy had reached back for the first time into the past. His first sight of the Willows had renewed that far-off impression; he had felt that the old house was full of muffled reverberations which his hand might set going if he could find the rope. . . . Since then the years had passed, and he had learned many things. His hand was nearer the rope--he was "warm," as the children said. But when he tried to evoke the Elinor Lorburn who had waltzed in the ballroom and wreathed her hair with flowers before her tilted toilet mirror the dumb walls remained dumb . . . he could not wake them. . . .</p>
			<p>The meagreness of his inherited experience, the way it had been torn off violently from everything which had gone before, again struck him with a pang of impoverishment. On the Fourth of July, at Advance and then at Euphoria, the orators of the day (and Grandpa Scrimser foremost among them) had been much given to dilating on the priceless qualities the pioneers had brought with them into the wilderness. To Vance it sometimes seemed that they had left the rarest of all behind. . . .</p>
			<p>He fancied he heard a step in the shadows and glanced up from his writing. "Vance!" Halo Tarrant exclaimed. She was standing there, in the doorway of the drawing room, with a look so amazed that Vance, jumping to his feet, lost his own sense of surprise in the shock of hers. "Why I thought you were in Europe!" he said.</p>
			<p>"I was to have been." She coloured slightly. "And then, at the last minute, I didn't go." She moved a step nearer. "You hadn't heard I was at Eaglewood?"</p>
			<p>"No. I didn't know."</p>
			<p>She smiled a little. "Well, I didn't know you were at the Willows. But just now, in passing the gate, I saw it was open--" (Oh, curse it, Vance thought--how could he have forgotten the padlock?) "and as I knew it wasn't Mrs. Tracy's day I came in to see who was here."</p>
			<p>Her eyes were fixed on him with a looked which seemed to call for an explanation, and he mumbled: "Mrs. Tracy's been sick. . . ."</p>
			<p>"I know; I'm sorry. And you're replacing her?"</p>
			<p>"There was no one else. At first I came only on Saturdays, just to see that things were all right. Then--" he lifted his head, and returned her look, "then the books pulled me back. I couldn't help it. And I got in the way of coming oftener."</p>
			<p>"I see. Very often?"</p>
			<p>"Every day, I guess. But they don't know it at home," he added hastily.</p>
			<p>"I know that too," she said, and, in answer to his glance of interrogation: "I've just come from there. I heard Mrs. Tracy was ill, and I looked in to see if there was anything I could do." She went on, a gleam of irony beneath her lashes: "Laura Lou seemed to think you were in New York."</p>
			<p>The blood rose to Vance's face and burned its way slowly to his temples. "I . . . she's been sick too. . . . I knew she'd just get fretting if she thought I came here often . . . like this. . . ."</p>
			<p>Halo Tarrant stood before him pale and grave as a young judge; he felt that his fate trembled in the balance. "She'll despise me for it, too," he thought, with a pang which blotted out his other apprehensions. She made no answer, but presently she said: "I hadn't seen Laura Lou for a year. How very beautiful she's grown."</p>
			<p>Vance, in his surprise, could produce only an inarticulate murmur. There was no answer in his vocabulary to such amenities, especially when they were unexpected; and he stood abashed and awkward. At length he faltered out: "I guess you think I oughtn't to be here at all."</p>
			<p>"Well, I won't betray you," she rejoined, still gravely. For a moment or two neither spoke; then she moved toward the table, and resting her long hand on it (yes, he thought, it was certainly like the hands in the picture), she bent over his manuscript. "You do your work here?"</p>
			<p>"Yes. Down home there's no place but the dining room. And they're always coming in and disturbing me."</p>
			<p>Mrs. Tarrant tossed off her hat, and seated herself in the carven armchair. The severity of her gaze had softened. Vance leaned with folded arms in the window recess. From where he stood her head, with its closely folded hair and thin cheeks, was just below that of the portrait, and though the eyes were different he felt again the subtle resemblance between the two women. "You do look like her!" he exclaimed.</p>
			<p>She glanced up, narrowing her short-sighted eyes. "Like poor Cousin Elinor? I suppose you and she are getting to be great friends, aren't you?"</p>
			<p>"Yes." He laid his hand on the page at her elbow. "This is about her."</p>
			<p>"About Elinor?"</p>
			<p>He nodded excitedly. "I'm writing her life--trying to."</p>
			<p>His visitor looked at him with astonishment. "Her life--Elinor Lorburn's?"</p>
			<p>"I mean, the way I imagine it. How things were in the days when this house was built. I don't know how to explain . . . but I think I see a big subject for a novel--different from the things the other fellows are trying for. What interests me would be to get back into the minds of the people who lived in these places--to try and see what we came out of. Till I do I'll never understand why we are what we are. . . ." He paused, breathless with the attempt to formulate his problem. "But I guess it won't do," he began again. "I don't know enough about those old times. I think there are good things in what I've done, though . . . the beginning's good, anyway. See here," he broke out, "I wish you'd let me read it to you; will you?"</p>
			<p>Hesitations and scruples had fallen from him. He forgot that he had been found where he had no right to be, and the probable consequences--forgot the possibility of Halo Tarrant's disapproval, was hardly aware of her presence even, save as a listener to what he thirsted to have heard. She nodded and leaned back in her chair; and gathering up the sheets he began.</p>
			<p>His elocution was probably not much better than when he had recited his poems to her on Thundertop. But he did not think of that till he had started; and after the first paragraph he was swept on by the new emotion of watching his vision take shape in another mind. Such a thing had never happened to him, and before he had read a page he was vibrating with the sense of her exquisite participation. What his imagination had engendered was unfolding and ripening in hers; whatever her final judgment was, it would be as if his own mind had judged him.</p>
			<p>As his self-possession returned, the enjoyment of her actual presence was added to the intellectual excitement. Everything about her seemed to be listening and understanding, from the attentive droop of her lids to the repressed eagerness of her lips and the hands folded quietly on her knee. When he had ended he turned away abruptly, as though she might see even the heart thumping in his throat. He threw the manuscript down, and his self-confidence crumbled.</p>
			<p>Mrs. Tarrant did not speak. She merely unclasped her hands, and then laid one over the other again, without otherwise moving. To Vance the silence seemed abysmal. He turned back and almost shouted at her: "Well, it's no earthly good, is it?"</p>
			<p>She looked up. "It's going to be by far the best thing you've done." Her voice sounded rich with restrained emotion. "I can't tell you how strange the feeling is--all those dull familiar things with their meaning given back to them. . . ."</p>
			<p>"Oh, is that what I've done? You see--you <i>do</i> see?"</p>
			<p>"Of course--I see with your eyes, and with mine too. That's the strangeness--and the beauty. Oh, Vance, how did you do it? I'm so glad!" She stood up and drew nearer. It was as if achievement were shining down on him. "You must go on--you must give up everything to finish this." He nodded, speechless, and she stood looking about the shadowy room. "And of course you must do your work here. You've made this place yours, you know. And you must be quiet and undisturbed. I'll arrange it for you." She sat down again, leaning toward him across the table. "But this is only a beginning; tell me how you mean to go on."</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
