<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-4" id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h3>
			<p>Tarrant did not reappear till Monday evening. He had telephoned to his wife from Boston that on returning to New York he would go straight to the office of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Hour</i>, and that she was not to expect him till dinner. They were dining alone at home, and she had already got into her tea gown and was waiting to hear his latchkey before ringing for dinner. She knew that Lewis, who liked to arrive late when he chose, also liked his food to be as perfectly cooked as when he was on time; and she sometimes felt despairingly that only her mother could have dealt with such a problem.</p>
			<p>He came in, hurried and animated, with the slight glow which took the chill from his face when things were prospering. “All he wants to make him really handsome,” his wife mused, “is to have real things to do.”</p>
			<p>“Hullo, my dear; not late, am I? Well, put off dinner a bit, will you? I’ve been on the jump ever since I left. Here’s something to amuse you while I’m changing.” He threw a manuscript into her lap, and she saw Vance Weston’s name across the page.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Lewis! He turned up, then?”</p>
			<p>“He condescended to, yes⁠—about an hour ago.”</p>
			<p>“Well⁠—is it good? You’ve had time to read it?”</p>
			<p>Little noncommittal wrinkles formed themselves about his smile as he stood looking down at her. “Yes, I’ve read it; but I’d rather wait till you have before I tell you what I think. I want your unbiased opinion⁠—and I also want to jump into my bath.” The door closed on him, and she sat absently fingering the pages on her knee. How well she knew that formula: “Your unbiased opinion.” What it meant was, invariably, that he wasn’t sure of himself, that he wanted someone else to support his view, or even to provide him with one. After that his judgments would ring out with such authority that people said: “One good thing about Tarrant is that he always knows his own mind.”</p>
			<p>Héloïse sent the cook a disarming message⁠—she knew how long it took Lewis to dress. Then she drew her armchair to the lamp. She was aware, as she began to read, of a certain listlessness. Was it possible that her opinion would not be as unbiased as her husband supposed? Had she felt an interest in Vance’s literary career only because she hoped to renew her old relation with the eager boy who had touched her imagination, to resume the part of monitress and muse which she had played during their long sessions at the Willows? When he had said: “You were the first to show me what there was in books,” her contracted heart had glowed and unfolded; when, a moment later, he told her he was engaged, and she had seen an unknown figure intrude between them, something in her shrank back, a door was closed. Well, why not? She was lonely; she had looked forward to the possibility of such comradeship as he might give her. But though she had been fated to disappointment that was surely not a reason for feeling less interest in his work.⁠ ⁠… As she took up the manuscript she tried to arouse in herself the emotion she had felt a few days earlier, when her eyes lit on the opening paragraph of “One Day.”</p>
			<p>The new tale was different; less vehement, less emotional, above all less personal. Was he already arriving at an attitude of detachment from his subject? If so, Halo knew, Frenside would see a future novelist in him. “If he goes on retailing the successive chapters of his own history, as they happen to him, they’ll be raw autobiography, or essays disguised as novels; but not real novels. And he probably won’t be able to keep it up long.” That would be what Frenside would say in such a case. It was his unalterable conviction that the “me-book,” as he called it, however brilliant, was at best sporadic, with little reproductive power. Well, the charge of subjectivity could hardly be brought against the tale she had just read. Boy as he was, the writer had moved far enough away from his subject to see several sides of it. And it was an odd story to have interested a beginner. It was called “Unclaimed,” and related an episode brought about by the sending home of the bodies of American soldiers fallen in France. Myra Larcom, the beauty of her prairie village, had become engaged in 1917 to Ben Purchase, a schoolmate and neighbour. Ben Purchase was killed at the front, and Myra became the heroine as well as the beauty of Green Lick, which happened to have no other fallen son to mourn. When the government offered to restore its dead soldiers to their families for burial, Myra of course accepted. Her Ben was an orphan, with no relations near enough to assume the expense of his translation; and besides, she said, she would never have allowed anyone else to have the privilege.⁠ ⁠… But the dead heroes were slow in returning. Months passed, and before there was any news of the warrior’s approach, another hero⁠—and alive⁠—had come back and won her. It appeared that her engagement to Ben Purchase had been a last-minute affair, the result of a moonlight embrace the night he started; indeed, she was no longer very sure that there had been an actual engagement; and when at length his body reached New York there was no one to claim it; and no one to pay for its transport, much less for the funeral and gravestone. But Tullia Larcom, Myra’s elder sister, had always been secretly in love with Ben, though he had never given her a glance. She was a plain girl, a predestined old maid, the drudge and butt of the family. She had put by a little money as the village seamstress, but not much⁠—there were so many demands on her. And it turned out to be an expensive business⁠—a terribly expensive business⁠—to bring home and bury a dead hero. And the longer you left him in the care of his grateful government the more expensive it became.⁠ ⁠… “Unclaimed” was the simple and unsentimental relation of how Tullia Larcom managed to bring Ben Purchase’s body back to Green Lick and give him a grave and a headstone.⁠ ⁠… When Halo finished reading she had forgotten about her husband, forgotten about the cook, forgotten even about her own little emotional flutter over Vance Weston.⁠ ⁠… All her thoughts were with Tullia at Ben Purchase’s grave.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“How did he know⁠ ⁠… how did he know?” she murmured to herself. And the fact that he did know seemed warrant of future achievement.</p>
			<p>“Halo, are you never coming?” her husband’s voice called from the dining room. “You seem to forget that a hard day’s work makes a fellow hungry.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>At dinner he went into all sorts of details about his new printing contract, and his interviews in Boston, where he had gone to secure various literary collaborations. All that he said was interesting to Halo. She began to see that <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Hour</i> would bring a new breath of life into her world as well as her husband’s. It would be exciting to get hold of the budding geniuses; and once she had let Lewis discover them, she knew they would be handed over to her to be tamed and amused. She had inherited her mother’s liking for the company of clever people, people who were doing things and making things, and she saw the big room in which she now spent so many solitary hours peopled by a galaxy of new authors and artists, gathered together under the banner of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Hour</i>.</p>
			<p>“If only nobody calls it a ‘salon’ Lewis won’t mind,” she thought.</p>
			<p>There was so much to hear and to say that Vance Weston was not mentioned again till dinner was over and they returned to the library. Tarrant lit his cigar and settled down in his own particular easy chair, which had a broad shelf for his coffee cup and ashtray. “Well, how does it strike you?” he said, nodding in the direction of the manuscript.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Lewis, you’ve discovered a great novelist!” She prided herself on the tactfulness of the formula; but enthusiasm for others was apt to excite her husband’s suspicions, even when it implied praise for himself.</p>
			<p>“Novelist? Well⁠—we’ll let the future take care of itself. But this particular thing⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I think it’s remarkable. The simplicity, the unselfconsciousness.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“H’m.” He puffed at his cigar and threw back his head in meditation. “To begin with, war stories are a drug in the market.”</p>
			<p>She flashed back: “Whose market?” and he replied, with a hint of irritation: “You know perfectly well that we can’t afford to disregard entirely what the public wants.”</p>
			<p>“I thought you were going to teach it what it ought to want.”</p>
			<p>As this phrase was taken from his own prospectus it was too unanswerable to be welcome, and his frown deepened. “Little by little⁠—certainly. But anyhow, doesn’t it strike you that this story⁠—which has its points, of course⁠—is⁠ ⁠… well, rather lacking in relief? A trifle old-fashioned⁠ ⁠… humdrum? The very title tells you what it’s about.”</p>
			<p>“And you want to have it called ‘What Time Chronos?’ or ‘Ants and Archangels’?” She broke off, remembering the risk of accusing him of wanting anything but the rarest and highest. “Of course I know what you mean⁠ ⁠… but isn’t there another point of view? I mean for a review like <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Hour</i>? Why not try giving your readers the exact opposite of what all the other on-the-spot editors are straining to provide? Something quiet, logical, Jane Austen-y⁠ ⁠… obvious, almost? A reaction from the universal paradox? At the very moment when even <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Home and Mother</i> is feeding its million readers with a novel called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Jerks and Jazzes</i>, it strikes me that the newest note to sound might be the very quiet⁠—something beginning: ‘In the year 1920 there resided in the industrial city of P⁠⸺ a wealthy manufacturer of the name of Brown.⁠ ⁠…’ That’s one of the reasons why I’ve taken such a fancy to Vance’s story.”</p>
			<p>Adroitly as she had canalized her enthusiasm, she did not expect an immediate response. She knew that what she had said must first be transposed and become his own. He laughed at her tirade, and said he’d make a note of her titles anyhow⁠—they were too good to be lost; but the fact remained that, for the opening number of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Hour</i> under its new management, he thought they ought to have something rather more showy. But he’d think it over⁠ ⁠… he’d told Weston to come back in a day or two. “Queer devil⁠—says he wrote the thing white hot, in forty-eight hours after getting here; must be about ten thousand words.⁠ ⁠… And it jogs along so soberly.”</p>
			<p>The bell rang, and Halo said: “That must be Frenny.” Frenside was incapable of spending an evening alone. His life of unsettled aspirations and inconsecutive work made conversation a necessity to him as soon as he had shaken off the daily task, and he often drifted in to sit with Halo for an hour after his club or restaurant dinner.</p>
			<p>He entered with his usual dragging step, stooping and somewhat heavier, but with the same light smouldering under the thick lids behind his eyeglasses.</p>
			<p>“Hallo, Lewis⁠—didn’t know you were back,” he grumbled as Tarrant got up to welcome him.</p>
			<p>“There’s a note of disappointment in your voice,” his host bantered. “If you were led to think you’d find Halo alone I advise you to try another private enquiry man.”</p>
			<p>“Would, if they weren’t so expensive,” Frenside bantered back, settling down into the armchair that Tarrant pushed forward. “But never mind⁠—let’s hear about the new <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Hour</i>. (Why not rechristen it that, by the way?) Have you come back with an argosy?”</p>
			<p>“Well, I’ve done fairly well.” Tarrant liked to dole out his news in guarded generalities. “But I’m inclined to think the best of my spoils may be here at your elbow. Remember how struck I was by that story, ‘One Day,’ by the boy from the West whose other things you turned down so unmercifully?”</p>
			<p>“Not unmercifully⁠—lethally. What about him?”</p>
			<p>“Only that I rather believe he’s going to make people sit up. I’ve got something of his here that strikes an entirely new note⁠—”</p>
			<p>“<em>Another?</em>” Frenside groaned.</p>
			<p>Tarrant’s lips narrowed; but after a moment he went on: “Yes, the phrase is overworked. But I don’t use it in the blurb sense. This boy has had the nerve to go back to a quiet, almost old-fashioned style: no jerks, no paradoxes⁠—not even afraid of lingering over his transitions; why, even the title⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Halo, mindful of Frenside’s expectation of a whiskey and soda, rose and went into the dining room to remind the maid. She reflected, not ill-humouredly, that it would be easier for Lewis to get through with the business of appropriating her opinions if she stayed out of hearing while he was doing it; and she lingered a few minutes, musing pleasurably over the interest of their editorial venture, and of the part Vance Weston might be going to play in it. She had believed in him from the first; and her heart exulted at the thought that he was already fulfilling his promise.</p>
			<p>“If he keeps up to this standard he may be the making of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Hour</i>; and when he finds himself an important literary figure he’ll take a different view of his future. We’re not likely ever to hear of his engagement again,” she thought, irresistibly reassured; and she decided that she must manage, as often as possible, to keep an evening free for their Dante readings. When Lewis went to his men’s dinners it would be easy.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>As she reentered the library she heard Frenside’s gruff laugh, and her husband saying: “Damned cheek, eh? Just told me in so many words he couldn’t come to the office that day because he had to go and see his girl.⁠ ⁠… Seems the poor devil’s going to be married; and who do you suppose she is? Why, one of those down-at-the-heel Tracys at Paul’s Landing.⁠ ⁠… Halo, my dear, did you know you were going to have your new genius for a cousin?”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
